Reflections on Work Rules
=========================
Sashan Govender

== Introduction

https://www.amazon.com.au/Work-Rules-Insights-Inside-Transform-ebook/dp/B00NLHJKBE[Work Rules:
Insights from Inside Google that Will Transform How You Live and Lead] is written by the people
operations manager at Google. Formally he's the Senior Vice President of People Operations. I'm not
entirely sure about the meaning behind the titles of President, Vice President, Senior Vice
President in America but I think it's safe to assume he's the he's the head human resources guy.
After all, he's published a book about how to manage people, and specifically how Google manages
it's people. Now why would anyone be interested in this? Well, for one Google's benefits for it's
employees are stellar, from free food to laundry services to haircuts on campus. The external image
of the Google work environment seems like a fun and productive place to work so who wouldn't want to
work there. In order to discover the secrets of creating a Google-like environment then this book is
a good place to start. There's little point recounting all the anecdotes Laszlo peppers his book
with to make the read interesting, but thankfully the book isn't simply a collection of stories that
begin with 'in my experience' or the retelling of someone else's experience in order to justify the
introduction of a work policy affecting staff. Nor does he make the mistake of drawing general
conclusions based on his own experience. Almost every piece of general advice in the book is backed
by data and referenced research that corroborates any story he might tell. There is a core
emphasis on making decisions based on data that comes across through the entire book. When running
an organization like Google that has 50000 staff you have a pretty decent sample set on which to
carry out experiments. Couple that with Google's innate ability to extract information from raw data
and you have a very powerful tool for research and way to evaluate the effectiveness of any work
policy implemented. The themes that I found the most interesting were: how it all started, how
Google hires, performance evaluation, work place benefits, management of staff and the role of
management. There were some chapters in the book that I had little interest in probably because I
don't have a HR background so I will overlook those in this summary. If you're a software engineer
there's very little related to the practical day to day activities related to software development
like debugging, coding or the differences between functional languages and imperative ones. If you
are a software development manager you won't find anything about agile versus waterfall or managing
clients expectations. However as an engineer or manager there is a lot of information in it that
lends itself to improving the quality of your work life experience. After all work is 1/3 of your
life, so telling yourself that 'oh it's just a job', is a lie that you use to suppress the fact that
it's 1/3 of your life you are putting into it. You owe it to yourself to try and make that 1/3
meaningful. What I thought was missing from the book was something about conflict resolution. For
example if two groups have to implement something they need to share the use of in the future, one
generally collaborates to create a data model for this piece of software, since by defining the
model you gain an understanding about how this thing will operate. In these cases there might be
disagreement about a field; should it be in class A or in class B and one group really wants it in
class A and the other really wants it in class B and there's no technical reason why one is better
than the other, yet it results in less cost to the group that gets their wish in the future. It
would have been interesting to see how these deadlocks are resolved, other than 'Hire better
people', which seems to be the maxim when all else fails but wouldn't work in these scenarios.

== Hiring
*Quite simply Google doesn't hire based on experience*. Why? Because the data tells them that
experience is not the best indicator of a person's ability to do a job.

[quote,Laszlo Bock,Work Rules]
In 1998, Frank Schmidt and John Hunter published a meta-analysis of eighty-five years of research on
how well assessments predict performance.85 They looked at nineteen different assessment techniques
and found that typical, unstructured job interviews were pretty bad at predicting how someone would
perform once hired. Unstructured interviews have an r2 of 0.14, meaning that they can explain only
14 percent of an employee’s performance. This is somewhat ahead of reference checks (explaining 7
percent of performance), ahead of the number of years of work experience (3 percent), and well ahead
of “graphology,” or handwriting analysis (0.04 percent), which I’m stunned that anyone actually
uses. Maybe some hospitals test the legibility of doctors’ handwriting. … The best predictor of how
someone will perform in a job is a work sample test (29 percent)

Again this is a prime example of basing decisions based on research, and forgoing intuition and
experience. One person's experience is only one person's. However organizations are lazy or don't have
the time to hire and interview properly so it's easy to see why most rely on experience as an
indicator of worth. Furthermore Laszlo writes that a creative person with aptitude will come to the
same conclusion that someone may have learned through experience. However, he does concede some
specializations can't be replaced by creative people with aptitude. One would struggle to catch up
to someone who for example spent a few years studying computer graphics and knew about bsp
partitions, numerical solvers, etc... No matter how good one is as a generalist with their search
and sorting algorithms you will struggle to catch up to someone who has specialized in graphics or
any other field for that matter, given that they both have the similar level of fundamental ability.
This correlates with how I feel as well; I've known this to be true since my early 20's when
starting out in the industry yet constantly was held back based on lack of experience. It becomes an
excuse for management to not pay people what they are worth and to over pay incompetent experienced
people. Now, in my late 30's, I still see the problems caused by hiring based only on experience
amongst engineers. *Experience without ability is useless.* With regard to jobs that require
soft skills and where work sample test is not possible, then there is little advice in the book
other than 'hire someone who is better than you in some way', and then how that is assessed I'm
guessing, since the book provides no details, relies on a series of unstructured interview which
only has a 14 percent chance of being accurate.

What about training programs and processes? Can't they compensate and elevate the 'bad' hires? This
thinking is born out of an education system that teaches kids that they are all equally good at
whatever subject they do and they're all winners because they tried. Reality doesn't work like this.
Imagine if doctors were evaluated based on trying? "Oh well you cut the wrong artery but you tried
so you pass. Congratulations." Training programs can't compensate for bad hires; they'll upset the
good staff, the ones who already know what they are doing, and the ones that can't think and apply
what they learn will not benefit as much as the organization assumes. Processes will kill innovation
by stifling free thought and increasing barriers to getting the job done. Additionally you are not
going to elevate an incompetent person by giving them a bullet proof process to follow, unless their
job is trivial. Let's run a thought experiment and start by assuming it is true that a well
constructed process can elevate an incompetent programmer. Your organization realizes that there is
a problem in the quality of the work done by some programmers. To address it you instigate a process
to make the job of programming easier. The process covers all sorts of things about programming and
a nice fat document is the result containing exhaustive list of code scenarios and solutions, like
when to use a pointer, when to delete it, when to break a function into smaller functions, when to
use certain data structures. Even better this magic document specifies the exact code to write when
faced with a problem, like how to find a file or how to connect to any web API. Then you implement
this process and distribute the magic document. Your sub par programmers are now empowered and their
code improves because they have a document that tells them exactly what to write when to write it.
Obviously there are a few things wrong here. The document would be impossible to produce; yes there
is a finite (it's finite because there'll be a limit dictated by the hardware on the number of bytes
in a program) set of programs that can exist but the set is so large you would need to be omniscient
to produce such a thing. Moreover, all you have succeeded in doing is turning your so called
software engineer into a typist, yet they are being paid to be software engineers. This doesn't make
sense and thankfully there's enough in the book to argue that processes can't remedy bad hires.

[quote,Laszlo Bock,Work Rules]
The presence of a huge training budget is not evidence that you’re investing in your people. It’s
evidence that you failed to hire the right people to begin with.

So how does Google hire? Initially they relied on referrals which resulted in lots of people from
the same clique joining. As the organization grew their process expanded and they became less
reliant on the pedigree of the institution that the candidate graduated from, an admission to the
reality that smart people exist everywhere but not every smart person's parents have the money to
fund a Stanford education. Traditional recruiters struggled with the Google requirement of 'smart
generalist' when the recruitment industry was and still is expecting buzzwords. The hiring process
is arduous involving 4 or 5 layers of interviews which can span months. Each stage in the process
has a specific focus. Eventually a candidate's portfolio is reviewed by Larry Page who can veto if
he chooses.

[quote,Laszlo Bock,Work Rules]
If the Senior Leader Review is supportive, then Larry is sent each week’s recommended hires. The
report includes links to the detailed hiring packets for every candidate as well as summaries about
each candidate and the feedback and recommendations from each successive level of review. The most
common feedback from Larry is that a candidate might not meet our hiring bar or that the creativity
shown in a portfolio might not be up to snuff.

See, creativity is important.

== Benefits
Most of Google's benefits don't cost them anything. Laundry service, day care, haircuts, car
services are all paid for by staff. The only thing Google does is bring the service on campus making
it accessible and thus reducing the cost by negotiating volume discounts. Obviously the size of the
Google campus makes this possible and I'd be surprised if this was available in all their offices
worldwide. It makes sense to provide these services since coming home after a hard days work to do
them is just tedious and boring and simply not something you want to do.

The highest costs to the company is the food, shuttle service and subsidized child care.
Interestingly they use the kitchen to fuel innovation. Innovation within a tightly knit team dies
over time. New ideas are needed as input to fuel new innovations and the kitchen area is a natural
social gathering place where interaction can take place across teams. Therefore over time there is a
return on the investment in free food, although I doubt there's any data on how many lunch dates it
took Bob from AI and Rob from Graphics to concoct a new gizmo.

In summary the benefits are a collection of little things that cost the company little.

[quote,Laszlo Bock,Work Rules]
Most of the programs we use to delight and care for Googlers are free, or very close to it.

.About
This article was written using Vim in Asciidoc.

