Start the terminal program.  

At the command prompt type:  

**Input.**

    $ echo "hello world"

**Output.**

    hello world

A Starting Point
================

I like my shell scripts to start with a main function.

    #!/bin/bash

    function main {
      echo "hello world"
    }

    main
    exit

You can copy and paste the text above into a file. To run it you’ll need
to enable execute permissions on the file using `chmod`.

    chmod +x main.sh
    ./main.sh

File permissions are explained later. Remember, to run the script prefix
the file with `./`. `.` points to the current directory. Unlike Windows
the current directory is not in the `PATH` environment variable which is
why we explicitly tell the shell the path to the binary to execute.

Command Line Arguments
----------------------

All arguments to the script can be captured using `$@`. If you know
which argument you want you can use the positional arguments to get
them.

    #!/bin/bash

    function main {
      echo "$1 $2" 
    }

    main $@ 
    exit

-   `1` and `2` are positional arguments.

-   `@` you can think of as a an array of all the positional parameters.

Parameters
==========

Parameters are Bash’s variables. Bash is untyped so you can think of
them as strings.

**Setting a parameter.**

    VAR="some val"

> **Warning**
>
> Spacing after a variable name matters. There can’t be a space between
> the variable name and the value.

    VAR = "some val" 

-   Spaces after a paramter name are bad.

If you try and run this you’ll see and error like:

`VAR: command not found`

Why? Because whenever Bash sees a space it thinks that the text
preceding is the start of a command, and tries to run it, but `VAR` is
not a binary in the `PATH`, and it can’t be found.

If you want to get at the value of a variable you need to prefix it with
a `$`. Placing the `$` in front of a parameter causes **parameter
expansion**.

> **Tip**
>
> Best practice is to use double quotes when performing parameter
> expansion.

    VAR="some file"
    touch "$VAR"

Why double quote? In the case above, `touch` is a program that creates a
file. If double quotes were not used then two files, `some` and `file`,
would be created.

> **Note**
>
> Bash has quite a few special parameters. We’ve seen some already, the
> positional paramters like `1` and `2` and `@` which expands all the
> positional paramters.
